

## Installation of binary packages

Binary packages are provided for the following Linux distributions:
  - Ubuntu 20.04 "Focal" 
  - Debian 10 "Buster"

Ubuntu packages were tested on XUbuntu distributions and should work on
any Ubuntu desktop flavour (e.g. native Ubuntu, KUbuntu, LUbuntu). 

The binary package files are hosted on a GitHub repository which is not
accessible by the native software package management system provided by
the Linux distribution. Nevertheless, installation is easily performed
by following these steps:
- Download the
  [install script](https://github.com/ewelot/airtools/raw/master/install_deb.sh) (e.g. right-click the link and choose `Save Link As`)
- Open the file explorer (double-click the home icon)
- Locate the file in your download folder
- Open a terminal window in the download folder (choose appropriate entry
  from `File` menu)
- Run the install script by executing the following command in this terminal
  window: `sudo bash install_deb.sh`


## Compiling and Installing from source code

If you are running a Linux distribution for which there are no binary packages
provided then you must compile and install all software components by yourself.
The compilation depends on a number of libraries. On a Debian/Ubuntu based
distribution they can be installed by the following example command:

    apt-get install libnetpbm10-dev libjasper-dev libjpeg-dev libcfitsio3-dev \
        libtiff5-dev libfftw3-dev libblas-dev libatlas-base-dev \
        libplplot-dev plplot12-driver-xwin plplot12-driver-cairo libshp-dev \
        libcurl4-gnutls-dev

Please note that package names may be different, depending on your distribution.
If you are compiling from a Debian source packages you must also install the
required build tools:

    apt-get install build-essential fakeroot devscripts debhelper \
        javahelper dh-autoreconf

If you have questions regarding the detailed procedure, do not hesitate to
contact the author of the AIRTOOLS software.


## Documentation

Documentation is available under the `/usr/share/doc/airtools-doc/` directory
after successful installation of the binary packages. The most up-to-date
content is always found on GitHub's
[doc directory](doc/).


## Known Problems

No plots during "Astrometric calibration":

Several check plots are generated by the underlying `scamp` program. This
might fail due to a buggy plplot driver which is shipped on some Linux
distributions. Solution: Remove the offending package by
`sudo apt-get remove plplot12-driver-qt`.
